## Puerto Rico and Purpose
Puerto Rico has been facing significant challenges in recent years.  Most recently in April 2023, the Governor of Puerto Rico declare a state of emergency due to coastal erosion.  Healthy coral reefs can prevent coastal erosion, however since Hurricane Maria in 2017, the coral reefs in Puerto Rico have struggled.  

Short-term solutions, such as beach nourishment, can provide temporary protection against erosion, but may not be sustainable in the long run.  Building bans, such as the one in place in Rincon, Puerto Rico, can be more effective long-term solutions to prevent further development along vulnerable coastal areas.  Other measures, such as bolstering the health of existing coral reefs and introducing artificial coral reefs during non-hurricane seasons, can also protect the shoreline.  Challenges such as lack of funding and support from the federal government, ongoing lawsuits against FEMA, and issues with corruption in infrastructure development make it difficult to rely solely on government-funded solutions. Therefore, local government policies and community engagement are crucial in implementing effective strategies for addressing coastal erosion in Puerto Rico.

Further Reading:                  
<ul>
    <li>Puerto Rico has declared a state of emergency due to coastal erosion. <a href="https://apnews.com/article/puerto-rico-coastal-erosion-state-emergency-1cb74408d61a3feab6480efa69f94d0f">Link</a>.</li>
    <li>Locals resist coastal development of the island. <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2022/jul/23/puerto-rico-beach-anti-gentrification-protests">Link.</a></li>
    <li>Government says to find to methods to combat coastal erosion as previous short-term solutions have failed. <a href="https://www.drna.pr.gov/noticias/drna-no-recomienda-soluciones-temporeras-ante-problema-de-erosion-costera/">Link.</a> (In Spanish)</li>
    <li>Puerto Rico groups sue FEMA for ignoring renewable energy sources while rebuilding power grid post Hurricane Maria. <a href="https://www.reuters.com/legal/fema-sued-over-lack-renewables-rebuilding-puerto-ricos-power-grid-2023-04-12/">Link.</a></li>
</ul>


## The Maps
1. The interactive map was made using Leaflet 1.9.3, Bootstrap 5.2.3, PapaParse 5.3.0, and tiles from Open Street Map.  The data was sourced from US Census Data API (accessed April 2023).  The map above shows coral reef sites that were assessed following Hurricanes Irma and Maria that devastated Puerto Rico in 2017.  The data was collected during transect surveys and roving diver surveys between February 28 and May 7, 2018.  The sites shown on the map are triaged sites - the level of damage has been classified as "Minor", "Moderate", or "Severe" and they have been a restoration potential rating of "Low", "Medium", or "High". The user is able to click on the site and a popup shows the name of the reef and the potential restoration level.  

    The data included multiple lines for each reef with information regarding different species found at the site.  The data was pared down to show only 1 line of data for the reef site and the information for the different species was removed to reduce file size.  The variables kept included: Date, Site ID, Site Name, Restore Potential, Site Damage, Latitude and Longitude.


2. The static map was made using QGIS 3.24 and data sourced from World Resources Institute (accessed April 2023).  The data includes local threats to coral reefs.  Reef polygons are classified by estimated threat from coastal development. The threat to coral reefs from coastal development was based on size of cities, ports, and airports; size and density of hotels; and coastal population pressure (a combination of population density, growth, and tourism growth). Values of 0 indicate low threat, 100 indicate medium threat, 1000 indicate high threat.

    The data contains global data for worldwide coral reefs.  In QGIS the data was overlayed on CartoDb Dark Matter and the features were selected using click-drag area.  The data was unable to be filtered by location.  After saving selected features, it was given a categorized style that showed increased threat level as darkening color.  Then the map was exported as a geoJSON and a print layout was created.  Unfortunately the geoJSON did not have correct coordinates to use that data with a Leaflet map, so the map was added to the index.html as a static image.